README.md, before:

# DevConnector 2.0

> Social network for developers

This is a MERN stack application from the "MERN Stack Front To Back" course on [Udemy](https://www.udemy.com/mern-stack-front-to-back/?couponCode=TRAVERSYMEDIA). It is a small social network app that includes authentication, profiles and forum posts.

# Updates since course published

Such is the nature of software; things change frequently, newer more robust paradigms emerge and packages are continuously evolving.
Hopefully the below will help you adjust your course code to manage the most notable changes.

## Changes to GitHub API authentication

Since the course was published, GitHub has [depreciated authentication via URL query parameters](https://developer.github.com/changes/2019-11-05-deprecated-passwords-and-authorizations-api/#authenticating-using-query-parameters)
You can get an access token by following [these instructions](https://help.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/creating-a-personal-access-token-for-the-command-line)
For this app we don't need to add any permissions so don't select any in the _scopes_.
**DO NOT SHARE ANY TOKENS THAT HAVE PERMISSIONS**
This would leave your account or repositories vulnerable, depending on permissions set.

It would also be worth adding your `default.json` config file to `.gitignore`
If git has been previously tracking your `default.json` file then...

```bash
git rm --cached config/default.json
```

Then add your token to the config file and confirm that the file is untracked with `git status` before pushing to GitHub.
GitHub does have your back here though. If you accidentally push code to a repository that contains a valid access token, GitHub will revoke that token. Thanks GitHub 🙏

You'll also need to change the options object in `routes/api/profile.js` where we make the request to the GitHub API to...

```js
const options = {
  uri: encodeURI(
    `https://api.github.com/users/${req.params.username}/repos?per_page=5&sort=created:asc`
  ),
  method: 'GET',
  headers: {
    'user-agent': 'node.js',
    Authorization: `token ${config.get('githubToken')}`
  }
};
```

### npm package request depreciated

As of 11th February 2020 [request](https://www.npmjs.com/package/request) has been depreciated and is no longer maintained.
We already use [axios](https://www.npmjs.com/package/axios) in the client so we can easily change the above fetching of a users GitHub repositories to use axios.

Install axios in the root of the project

```bash
npm i axios
```

We can then remove the client installation of axios.

```bash
cd client
npm uninstall axios
```

Client use of the axios module will be resolved in the root, so we can still use it in client.

Change the above GitHub API request to..

```js
const uri = encodeURI(
  `https://api.github.com/users/${req.params.username}/repos?per_page=5&sort=created:asc`
);
const headers = {
  'user-agent': 'node.js',
  Authorization: `token ${config.get('githubToken')}`
};

const gitHubResponse = await axios.get(uri, { headers });
```

You can see the full change in [routes/api/profile.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/4be414c6a54994c18397dba9c927ad67b878508b/routes/api/profile.js#L324)

## uuid no longer has a default export

The npm package [uuid](https://www.npmjs.com/package/uuid) no longer has a default export, so in our [client/src/actions/alert.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/master/client/src/actions/alert.js) we need to change the import and use of this package.

change

```js
import uuid from 'uuid';
```

to

```js
import { v4 as uuidv4 } from 'uuid';
```

And where we use it from

```js
const id = uuid();
```

to

```js
const id = uuidv4();
```

## Addition of normalize-url package

Depending on what a user enters as their website or social links, we may not get a valid clickable url.
For example a user may enter _**traversymedia.com**_ or _**www.traversymedia.com**_ which won't be a clickable valid url in the UI on the users profile page.
To solve this we brought in [normalize-url](https://www.npmjs.com/package/normalize-url) to well.. normalize the url.

Regardless of what the user enters it will ammend the url accordingly to make it valid (assuming the site exists).
You can see the use here in [routes/api/profile.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/31e5318592b886add58923c751dba73274c711de/routes/api/profile.js#L71)

## Fix broken links in gravatar

There is an unresolved [issue](https://github.com/emerleite/node-gravatar/issues/47) with the [node-gravatar](https://github.com/emerleite/node-gravatar#readme) package, whereby the url is not valid. Fortunately we added normalize-url so we can use that to easily fix the issue. If you're not seeing Gravatar avatars showing in your app then most likely you need to implement this change.
You can see the code use here in [routes/api/users.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/master/routes/api/users.js#L44)

## Redux subscription to manage local storage

The rules of redux say that our [reducers should be pure](https://redux.js.org/basics/reducers#handling-actions) and do just one thing.

If you're not familiar with the concept of pure functions, they must do the following..

1. Return the same output given the same input.
2. Have no side effects.

So our reducers are not the best place to manage local storage of our auth token.
Ideally our action creators should also just dispatch actions, nothing else. So using these for additional side effects like setting authentication headers is not the best solution here.

Redux provides us with a [`store.subscribe`](https://redux.js.org/api/store#subscribelistener) listener that runs every time a state change occurs.

We can use this listener to **_watch_** our store and set our auth token in local storage and axios headers accordingly.

- if there is a token - store it in local storage and set the headers.
- if there is no token - token is null - remove it from storage and delete the headers.

The subscription can be seen in [client/src/store.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/master/client/src/store.js)

We also need to change our [client/src/utils/setAuthToken.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/master/client/src/utils/setAuthToken.js) so it now handles both the setting of the token in local storage and in axios headers.

With those two changes in place we can remove all setting of local storage from [client/src/reducers/auth.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/master/client/src/reducers/auth.js). And remove setting of the token in axios headers from [client/src/actions/auth.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/master/client/src/actions/auth.js). This helps keep our code predictable, manageable and ultimately bug free.

---

# Quick Start 🚀

### Add a default.json file in config folder with the following

```
{
  "mongoURI": "<your_mongoDB_Atlas_uri_with_credentials>",
  "jwtSecret": "secret",
  "githubToken": "<yoursecrectaccesstoken>"
}
```

### Install server dependencies

```bash
npm install
```

### Install client dependencies

```bash
cd client
npm install
```

### Run both Express & React from root

```bash
npm run dev
```

### Build for production

```bash
cd client
npm run build
```

### Test production before deploy

```bash
NODE_ENV=production node server.js
```

Check in browser on [http://localhost:5000/](http://localhost:5000/)

### Deploy to Heroku

If you followed the sensible advice above and included `config/default.json` `and config/production.json` in your .gitignore file, then pushing to Heroku will omit your config files from the push.  
However, Heroku needs these files for a successful build.  
So how to get them to Heroku without commiting them to GitHub?

What I suggest you do is create a local only branch, lets call it _production_.

```bash
git checkout -b production
```

We can use this branch to deploy from, with our config files.

Add the config file...

```bash
git add -f config/production.json
```

This will track the file in git on this branch only. **DON'T PUSH THE PRODUCTION BRANCH TO GITHUB**

Commit...

```bash
git commit -m 'ready to deploy'
```

Create your Heroku project

```bash
heroku create
```

And push the local production branch to the remote heroku master branch.

```bash
git push heroku production:master
```

Now Heroku will have the config it needs to build the project.

> **Don't forget to make sure your production database is not whitelisted in MongoDB Atlas, otherwise the database connection will fail and your app will crash.**

After deployment you can delete the production branch if you like.

```bash
git checkout master
git branch -D production
```

Or you can leave it to merge and push updates from another branch.  
Make any changes you need on your master branch and merge those into your production branch.

```bash
git checkout production
git merge master
```

Once merged you can push to heroku as above and your site will rebuild and be updated.

---

## App Info

### Author

Brad Traversy
[Traversy Media](http://www.traversymedia.com)

### Version

2.0.0

### License

This project is licensed under the MIT License

Commit message:

notes on testing production and component reuse

README.md, after:

# DevConnector 2.0

> Social network for developers

This is a MERN stack application from the "MERN Stack Front To Back" course on [Udemy](https://www.udemy.com/mern-stack-front-to-back/?couponCode=TRAVERSYMEDIA). It is a small social network app that includes authentication, profiles and forum posts.

# Updates since course published

Such is the nature of software; things change frequently, newer more robust paradigms emerge and packages are continuously evolving.
Hopefully the below will help you adjust your course code to manage the most notable changes.

## Changes to GitHub API authentication

Since the course was published, GitHub has [depreciated authentication via URL query parameters](https://developer.github.com/changes/2019-11-05-deprecated-passwords-and-authorizations-api/#authenticating-using-query-parameters)
You can get an access token by following [these instructions](https://help.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/creating-a-personal-access-token-for-the-command-line)
For this app we don't need to add any permissions so don't select any in the _scopes_.
**DO NOT SHARE ANY TOKENS THAT HAVE PERMISSIONS**
This would leave your account or repositories vulnerable, depending on permissions set.

It would also be worth adding your `default.json` config file to `.gitignore`
If git has been previously tracking your `default.json` file then...

```bash
git rm --cached config/default.json
```

Then add your token to the config file and confirm that the file is untracked with `git status` before pushing to GitHub.
GitHub does have your back here though. If you accidentally push code to a repository that contains a valid access token, GitHub will revoke that token. Thanks GitHub 🙏

You'll also need to change the options object in `routes/api/profile.js` where we make the request to the GitHub API to...

```js
const options = {
  uri: encodeURI(
    `https://api.github.com/users/${req.params.username}/repos?per_page=5&sort=created:asc`
  ),
  method: 'GET',
  headers: {
    'user-agent': 'node.js',
    Authorization: `token ${config.get('githubToken')}`
  }
};
```

### npm package request depreciated

As of 11th February 2020 [request](https://www.npmjs.com/package/request) has been depreciated and is no longer maintained.
We already use [axios](https://www.npmjs.com/package/axios) in the client so we can easily change the above fetching of a users GitHub repositories to use axios.

Install axios in the root of the project

```bash
npm i axios
```

We can then remove the client installation of axios.

```bash
cd client
npm uninstall axios
```

Client use of the axios module will be resolved in the root, so we can still use it in client.

Change the above GitHub API request to..

```js
const uri = encodeURI(
  `https://api.github.com/users/${req.params.username}/repos?per_page=5&sort=created:asc`
);
const headers = {
  'user-agent': 'node.js',
  Authorization: `token ${config.get('githubToken')}`
};

const gitHubResponse = await axios.get(uri, { headers });
```

You can see the full change in [routes/api/profile.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/4be414c6a54994c18397dba9c927ad67b878508b/routes/api/profile.js#L324)

## uuid no longer has a default export

The npm package [uuid](https://www.npmjs.com/package/uuid) no longer has a default export, so in our [client/src/actions/alert.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/master/client/src/actions/alert.js) we need to change the import and use of this package.

change

```js
import uuid from 'uuid';
```

to

```js
import { v4 as uuidv4 } from 'uuid';
```

And where we use it from

```js
const id = uuid();
```

to

```js
const id = uuidv4();
```

## Addition of normalize-url package

Depending on what a user enters as their website or social links, we may not get a valid clickable url.
For example a user may enter _**traversymedia.com**_ or _**www.traversymedia.com**_ which won't be a clickable valid url in the UI on the users profile page.
To solve this we brought in [normalize-url](https://www.npmjs.com/package/normalize-url) to well.. normalize the url.

Regardless of what the user enters it will ammend the url accordingly to make it valid (assuming the site exists).
You can see the use here in [routes/api/profile.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/31e5318592b886add58923c751dba73274c711de/routes/api/profile.js#L71)

## Fix broken links in gravatar

There is an unresolved [issue](https://github.com/emerleite/node-gravatar/issues/47) with the [node-gravatar](https://github.com/emerleite/node-gravatar#readme) package, whereby the url is not valid. Fortunately we added normalize-url so we can use that to easily fix the issue. If you're not seeing Gravatar avatars showing in your app then most likely you need to implement this change.
You can see the code use here in [routes/api/users.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/master/routes/api/users.js#L44)

## Redux subscription to manage local storage

The rules of redux say that our [reducers should be pure](https://redux.js.org/basics/reducers#handling-actions) and do just one thing.

If you're not familiar with the concept of pure functions, they must do the following..

1. Return the same output given the same input.
2. Have no side effects.

So our reducers are not the best place to manage local storage of our auth token.
Ideally our action creators should also just dispatch actions, nothing else. So using these for additional side effects like setting authentication headers is not the best solution here.

Redux provides us with a [`store.subscribe`](https://redux.js.org/api/store#subscribelistener) listener that runs every time a state change occurs.

We can use this listener to **_watch_** our store and set our auth token in local storage and axios headers accordingly.

- if there is a token - store it in local storage and set the headers.
- if there is no token - token is null - remove it from storage and delete the headers.

The subscription can be seen in [client/src/store.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/master/client/src/store.js)

We also need to change our [client/src/utils/setAuthToken.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/master/client/src/utils/setAuthToken.js) so it now handles both the setting of the token in local storage and in axios headers.

With those two changes in place we can remove all setting of local storage from [client/src/reducers/auth.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/master/client/src/reducers/auth.js). And remove setting of the token in axios headers from [client/src/actions/auth.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/master/client/src/actions/auth.js). This helps keep our code predictable, manageable and ultimately bug free.

## Component reuse

The EditProfile and CreateProfile have been reduced to one component [ProfileForm.js](https://github.com/bradtraversy/devconnector_2.0/blob/master/client/src/components/profile-forms/ProfileForm.js)  
The majority of this logic came from the refactrored EditProfile Component.

---

# Quick Start 🚀

### Add a default.json file in config folder with the following

```
{
  "mongoURI": "<your_mongoDB_Atlas_uri_with_credentials>",
  "jwtSecret": "secret",
  "githubToken": "<yoursecrectaccesstoken>"
}
```

### Install server dependencies

```bash
npm install
```

### Install client dependencies

```bash
cd client
npm install
```

### Run both Express & React from root

```bash
npm run dev
```

### Build for production

```bash
cd client
npm run build
```

### Test production before deploy

After running a build in the client 👆, cd into the root of the project.  
And run...

```bash
NODE_ENV=production node server.js
```

Check in browser on [http://localhost:5000/](http://localhost:5000/)

### Deploy to Heroku

If you followed the sensible advice above and included `config/default.json` `and config/production.json` in your .gitignore file, then pushing to Heroku will omit your config files from the push.  
However, Heroku needs these files for a successful build.  
So how to get them to Heroku without commiting them to GitHub?

What I suggest you do is create a local only branch, lets call it _production_.

```bash
git checkout -b production
```

We can use this branch to deploy from, with our config files.

Add the config file...

```bash
git add -f config/production.json
```

This will track the file in git on this branch only. **DON'T PUSH THE PRODUCTION BRANCH TO GITHUB**

Commit...

```bash
git commit -m 'ready to deploy'
```

Create your Heroku project

```bash
heroku create
```

And push the local production branch to the remote heroku master branch.

```bash
git push heroku production:master
```

Now Heroku will have the config it needs to build the project.

> **Don't forget to make sure your production database is not whitelisted in MongoDB Atlas, otherwise the database connection will fail and your app will crash.**

After deployment you can delete the production branch if you like.

```bash
git checkout master
git branch -D production
```

Or you can leave it to merge and push updates from another branch.  
Make any changes you need on your master branch and merge those into your production branch.

```bash
git checkout production
git merge master
```

Once merged you can push to heroku as above and your site will rebuild and be updated.

---

## App Info

### Author

Brad Traversy
[Traversy Media](http://www.traversymedia.com)

### Version

2.0.0

### License

This project is licensed under the MIT License
